vm/vault/CREDENTIALS.md, before:

# Vaultwarden Credentials

> **TEAM_035**: Generated credentials for Vaultwarden VM

## Database Credentials

| Field | Value |
|-------|-------|
| **Host** | `192.168.100.2` (SQL VM via TAP) |
| **Port** | `5432` |
| **Database** | `vaultwarden` |
| **Username** | `vaultwarden` |
| **Password** | `PCc5zNNG6v8gwguclMQWMPjk4DUvg5F5` |

### Connection String
```
postgresql://vaultwarden:PCc5zNNG6v8gwguclMQWMPjk4DUvg5F5@192.168.100.2:5432/vaultwarden
```

## How to Change Password

1. **Update SQL VM init.sh** (`vm/sql/init.sh:259`):
   ```bash
   su postgres -c "psql -c \"CREATE USER vaultwarden WITH PASSWORD 'NEW_PASSWORD';\""
   ```

2. **Update Vault VM init.sh** (`vm/vault/init.sh:201`):
   ```bash
   export DATABASE_URL="postgresql://vaultwarden:NEW_PASSWORD@192.168.100.2:5432/vaultwarden"
   ```

3. **Rebuild both VMs**:
   ```bash
   ./sovereign build --sql
   ./sovereign build --vault
   ./sovereign deploy --sql --fresh-data
   ./sovereign deploy --vault --fresh-data
   ```

## Security Notes

- Password is stored in source control (same pattern as Forgejo)
- Database is only accessible via internal bridge network (192.168.100.0/24)
- Traffic never leaves the Android device
- For production, consider using the secrets system (`internal/secrets/secrets.go`)

Commit message:

TEAM_035: Centralize secrets in .env + fix Vaultwarden edge cases
- Move all secrets to .env (gitignored): DB passwords, Forgejo SECRET_KEY/INTERNAL_TOKEN, Vaultwarden admin token
- Pass secrets via kernel cmdline from start.sh to init.sh
- Update app.ini to use placeholders replaced at runtime
- Add vault VM artifacts to .gitignore
- Fix Vaultwarden web-vault path, DNS resolver, NTP sync, fallback certs

vm/vault/CREDENTIALS.md, after:

# Vaultwarden Credentials

> **TEAM_035**: Credentials centralized in `.env` (not in source control)

## Database Credentials

| Field | Value |
|-------|-------|
| **Host** | `192.168.100.2` (SQL VM via TAP) |
| **Port** | `5432` |
| **Database** | `vaultwarden` |
| **Username** | `vaultwarden` |
| **Password** | See `POSTGRES_VAULTWARDEN_PASSWORD` in `.env` |

### Connection String
```
postgresql://vaultwarden:${POSTGRES_VAULTWARDEN_PASSWORD}@192.168.100.2:5432/vaultwarden
```

## How Secrets Work

All secrets are centralized in `.env` (gitignored) and passed to VMs via kernel cmdline:

1. `.env` contains `POSTGRES_VAULTWARDEN_PASSWORD` and `VAULTWARDEN_ADMIN_TOKEN`
2. `start.sh` reads `.env` and passes secrets via kernel cmdline
3. `init.sh` reads secrets from `/proc/cmdline` at boot
4. No secrets in source control!

## How to Change Password

1. **Update `.env`**:
   ```bash
   POSTGRES_VAULTWARDEN_PASSWORD=your_new_password
   ```

2. **Redeploy with fresh data** (recreates database users):
   ```bash
   ./sovereign deploy --sql --fresh-data
   ./sovereign deploy --vault --fresh-data
   ./sovereign start --sql
   ./sovereign start --vault
   ```

## Security Notes

- Secrets stored in `.env` (gitignored, NOT in source control)
- Database only accessible via internal bridge network (192.168.100.0/24)
- Traffic never leaves the Android device
- Admin panel enabled if `VAULTWARDEN_ADMIN_TOKEN` is set
